CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVII
CHAPTER XXVIII
CHAPTER I.
on the 24th of September, 1861_
Dost thou recall, from the bosom of God where thou reposest, those
innumerable army of stars, thy shrewd and subtle questions, thy
discreet doubts, led me back to the sublime object of our common
judgments of the frivolous, yet wert thou ever persuaded that all
midst of these sweet meditations, the Angel of Death struck us both
with his wing: the sleep of fever seized us at the same time--I awoke
alone!... Thou sleepest now in the land of Adonis, near the holy
Byblus and the sacred stream where the women of the ancient mysteries
thou lovedst, those truths which conquer death, deprive it of terror,
In presenting an English version of the celebrated work of M. Renan,
the translator is aware of the difficulty of adequately rendering a
work so admirable for its style and beauty of composition. It is not
The great problem of the present age is to preserve the religious
spirit, whilst getting rid of the superstitions and absurdities that
The works of Mr. F.W. Newman and of Bishop Colenso, and the "Essays
of M. Renan will contribute to this object; and, if its utility may be
Introduction, in Which the Sources of This History Are Principally
Place of Jesus in the History of the World                          67
Infancy and Youth of Jesus--His First Impressions                   81
Education of Jesus                                                  89
The Order of Thought Which Surrounded the Development
of Jesus                                                            99
The First Saying of Jesus--His Ideas of a Divine Father
and of a Pure Religion--First Disciples                            119
John the Baptist--Visit of Jesus to John, and His Abode in
the Desert of Judea--Adoption of the Baptism of John               135
Development of the Ideas of Jesus Respecting the Kingdom
of God                                                             148
The Disciples of Jesus                                             173
The Kingdom of God Conceived as the Inheritance of the
Embassy from John in Prison to Jesus--Death of John--Relations
of His School with That of Jesus                                   206
Intercourse of Jesus with the Pagans and the Samaritans            227
Commencement of the Legends Concerning Jesus--His Own
Idea of His Supernatural Character                                 235
Definitive Form of the Ideas of Jesus Respecting the Kingdom
of God                                                             259
Institutions of Jesus                                              273
Increasing Progression of Enthusiasm and of Exaltation             285
Last Journey of Jesus to Jerusalem                                 305
Machinations of the Enemies of Jesus                               319
Last Week of Jesus                                                 329
Arrest and Trial of Jesus                                          344
Death of Jesus                                                     360
Fate of the Enemies of Jesus                                       376
Essential Character of the Work of Jesus                           381
In Which the Sources of This History Are Principally Treated
A history of the "Origin of Christianity" ought to embrace all the
from the first beginnings of this religion up to the moment when its
existence became a public fact, notorious and evident to the eyes of
all. Such a history would consist of four books. The first, which I
now present to the public, treats of the particular fact which has
served as the starting-point of the new religion, and is entirely
filled by the sublime person of the Founder. The second would treat of
the apostles and their immediate disciples, or rather, of the
generations of Christianity. I would close this about the year 100, at
the time when the last friends of Jesus were dead, and when all the
books of the New Testament were fixed almost in the forms in which we
now read them. The third would exhibit the state of Christianity under
highest degree of administrative perfection, and, governed by
book would cover the entire period of the second century. Lastly, the
from the time of the Syrian emperors. We should see the learned
system of the Antonines crumble, the decadence of the ancient
civilization become irrevocable, Christianity profit from its ruin,
the deified sages of Asia, take possession of a society for which
then that the religious ideas of the races grouped around the
Mediterranean became profoundly modified; that the Eastern religions
very numerous, totally forgot its dreams of a millennium, broke its
Roman world. The contests and the literary labors of the third
persecutions at the commencement of the fourth century, the last
effort of the empire to return to its former principles, which denied
foreshadow the change of policy which, under Constantine, reversed the
position, and made of the most free and spontaneous religious movement
an official worship, subject to the State, and persecutor in its turn.
the _Life of Jesus_, I am permitted to relate, as I understand it, the
history of the apostles, the state of the Christian conscience during
the weeks which followed the death of Jesus, the formation of the
cycle of legends concerning the resurrection, the first acts of the
Church of Jerusalem, the life of Saint Paul, the crisis of the time of
Nero, the appearance of the Apocalypse, the fall of Jerusalem, the
foundation of the Hebrew-Christian sects of Batanea, the compilation
of the Gospels, and the rise of the great schools of Asia Minor
originated by John. Everything pales by the side of that marvellous
the text of long critical dissertations upon controverted points. A
continuous system of notes enables the reader to verify from the
authorities all the statements of the text. These notes are strictly
know that for persons little accustomed to studies of this kind many
excellent writings[1] will there find explained a number of points
     par M. Reuss, professeur à la Faculté de Théologie et au
     Nicolas, professeur à la Faculté de Théologie Protestante de
work crowned by the Society of The Hague for the defence of the
The criticism of the details of the Gospel texts especially, has been
Although Strauss may be mistaken in his theory of the compilation of
the Gospels;[1] and although his book has, in my opinion, the fault of
motives which have guided me amidst a crowd of minutiæ, to study the
always judicious, though sometimes rather subtle argument, of the
acquired since the first edition of Strauss's work. The learned critic
Strauss never denied the existence of Jesus, but each page of his book
character of Jesus less distinct for us than it perhaps is in
I do not believe I have neglected any source of information as to
ancient evidences. Without speaking of a crowd of other scattered
five great collections of writings--1st, The Gospels, and the
writings of the New Testament in general; 2d, The compositions called
the "Apocrypha of the Old Testament;" 3d, The works of Philo; 4th,
Those of Josephus; 5th, The Talmud. The writings of Philo have the
priceless advantage of showing us the thoughts which, in the time of
Philo lived, it is true, in quite a different province of Judaism to
reigned at Jerusalem; Philo is truly the elder brother of Jesus. He
was sixty-two years old when the Prophet of Nazareth was at the height
of his activity, and he survived him at least ten years. What a pity
that the chances of life did not conduct him into Galilee! What would
notices of Jesus, of John the Baptist, of Judas the Gaulonite, are dry
profoundly Jewish in character and spirit, under a form which would be
Jesus[1] to be authentic. It is perfectly in the style of Josephus,
and if this historian has made mention of Jesus, it is thus that he
must have spoken of him. We feel only that a Christian hand has
of Josephus was made by the Christians, who adopted his writings as
essential documents of their sacred history. They made, probably in
of Josephus on the subject which occupies us, is the clear light which
[Footnote 3: In place of [Greek: christos outos ên], he certainly had
found in any of the manuscripts of Josephus which have come down to
The Apocryphal books of the Old Testament, especially the Jewish part
of the Sibylline verses, and the Book of Enoch, together with the Book
of Daniel, which is also really an Apocrypha, have a primary
importance in the history of the development of the Messianic
theories, and for the understanding of the conceptions of Jesus
respecting the kingdom of God. The Book of Enoch especially, which was
much read at the time of Jesus,[1] gives us the key to the expression
"Son of Man," and to the ideas attached to it. The ages of these
different books, thanks to the labors of Alexander, Ewald, Dillmann,
compilation of the most important of them in the second and first
centuries before Jesus Christ. The date of the Book of Daniel is still
more certain. The character of the two languages in which it is
written, the use of Greek words, the clear, precise, dated
announcement of events, which reach even to the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, the incorrect descriptions of Ancient Babylonia, there
given, the general tone of the book, which in no respect recalls the
writings of the captivity, but, on the contrary, responds, by a crowd
of analogies, to the beliefs, the manners, the turn of imagination of
the time of the Seleucidæ; the Apocalyptic form of the visions, the
place of the book in the Hebrew canon, out of the series of the
prophets, the omission of Daniel in the panegyrics of Chapter xlix. of
other proofs which have been deduced a hundred times, do not permit of
a doubt that the Book of Daniel was but the fruit of the great
excitement produced among the Jews by the persecution of Antiochus. It
but rather at the head of Apocalyptic literature, as the first model
of a kind of composition, after which come the various Sibylline
poems, the Book of Enoch, the Apocalypse of John, the Ascension of
Isaiah, and the Fourth Book of Esdras.
In the history of the origin of Christianity, the Talmud has hitherto
of the circumstances which surrounded the development of Jesus must be
parallel ways, the history of the one cannot well be understood
without the history of the other. Innumerable important details in the
collections of Lightfoot, Schoettgen, Buxtorf, and Otho contained
already a mass of information on this point. I have imposed on myself
the task of verifying in the original all the citations which I have
given me for this part of my task by a learned Israelite, M. Neubauer,
to clear up the most intricate parts of my subject by new researches.
The distinction of epochs is here most important, the compilation of
of these studies. Dates so recent will excite some fears among persons
it was written. But such scruples would here be out of place. The
teaching of the Jews from the Asmonean epoch down to the second
century was principally oral. We must not judge of this state of
intelligence by the habits of an age of much writing. The Vedas, and
before the _Mishnah_ of Judas the Saint, which has caused all others
of which is probably much earlier than is commonly supposed. The style
of the Talmud is that of loose notes; the collectors did no more
probably than classify under certain titles the enormous mass of
It remains for us to speak of the documents which, presenting
themselves as biographies of the Founder of Christianity, must
naturally hold the first place in a _Life of Jesus_. A complete
treatise upon the compilation of the Gospels would be a work of
itself. Thanks to the excellent researches of which this question has
room for many uncertainties, fully suffices for the necessities of
the composition of the Gospels having been one of the most important
facts for the future of Christianity in the second half of the first
century. We will touch here only a single aspect of the subject, that
which is indispensable to the completeness of our narrative. Leaving
aside all which belongs to the portraiture of the apostolic times, we
consult, in addition to the work of M. Réville, previously cited, the
writings of Reuss and Scherer in the _Revue de Théologie_, vol. x.,
xi., xv.; new series, ii., iii., iv.; and that of Nicolas in the
full of miracles and of the supernatural; but legends have not all the
same value. No one doubts the principal features of the life of
one, on the other hand, accords credit to the _Life of Apollonius of
Tyana_, because it was written long after the time of the hero, and
question upon which depends the opinion to be formed of their
Each of the four Gospels bears at its head the name of a personage,
these were the traditions proceeding from each of these apostles, and
the Gospels, without ceasing to be in part legendary, are of great
followed the death of Jesus, and in two instances, even to the
eye-witnesses of his actions.
Firstly, as to Luke, doubt is scarcely possible. The Gospel of Luke is
work of a man who selects, prunes, and combines. The author of this
Gospel is certainly the same as that of the Acts of the Apostles.[2]
Now, the author of the Acts is a companion of St. Paul,[3] a title
beyond doubt, namely, that the author of the third Gospel and of the
Acts was a man of the second apostolic generation, and that is
sufficient for our object. The date of this Gospel can moreover be
itself. The twenty-first chapter of Luke, inseparable from the rest of
the work, was certainly written after the siege of Jerusalem, and but
are concerned with a work written entirely by the same hand, and of
[Footnote 4: 2 Tim. iv. 11; Philemon 24; Col. iv. 14. The name of
_Lucas_ (contraction of _Lucanus_) being very rare, we need not fear
one of those homonyms which cause so many perplexities in questions of
The Gospels of Matthew and Mark have not nearly the same stamp of
totally disappears. A proper name written at the head of works of this
kind does not amount to much. But if the Gospel of Luke is dated,
those of Matthew and Mark are dated also; for it is certain that the
of a much more advanced compilation. We have, besides, on this point,
an excellent testimony from a writer of the first half of the second
century--namely, Papias, bishop of Hierapolis, a grave man, a man of
known of the person of Jesus.[1] After having declared that on such
writings on the acts and words of Christ: First, a writing of Mark,
the interpreter of the apostle Peter, written briefly, incomplete, and
information and recollections of the apostle Peter; second, a
collection of sentences ([Greek: logia]) written in Hebrew[2] by
physiognomy of the two books now called "Gospel according to Matthew,"
cannot be sustained: Firstly, because the writings of Matthew were to
Papias solely discourses in Hebrew, of which there were in circulation
very varying translations; and, secondly, because the writings of Mark
and Matthew were to him profoundly distinct, written without any
knowledge of each other, and, as it seems, in different languages.
Now, in the present state of the texts, the "Gospel according to
the final compiler of the first had the second under his eyes, or
compilations of either Matthew or Mark; but that our first two Gospels
are versions in which the attempt is made to fill up the gaps of the
Matthew" is found to have included almost all the anecdotes of Mark,
features which come from the _Logia_ of Matthew. Every one, besides,
so far from having been exhausted by the Gospels, that the Acts of the
Apostles and the most ancient Fathers quote many words of Jesus which
can be raised as to the authenticity of this passage. Eusebius, in
fact, far from exaggerating the authority of Papias, is embarrassed at
difficulty by treating him as a man of little mind. Comp. Irenæus,
the one hand, the original _Logia_ of Matthew, and, on the other, the
primitive narrative such as it left the pen of Mark. The _Logia_ are
doubtless represented by the great discourses of Jesus which fill a
considerable part of the first Gospel. These discourses form, in fact,
narratives of the first and second Gospels, they seem to have for
basis a common document, of which the text reappears sometimes in the
one and sometimes in the other, and of which the second Gospel, such
other words, the scheme of the _Life of Jesus_, in the synoptics,
rests upon two original documents--first, the discourses of Jesus
collected by Matthew; second, the collection of anecdotes and personal
reminiscences which Mark wrote from the recollections of Peter. We may
reason, the name of the "Gospel _according_ to Matthew" and of the
of Jesus were written in the Aramean language, and very early also his
were a number of others professing to represent the tradition of
sufficient merely to preserve in their hearts a lively image of him
margin of his copy the words, and the parables he found elsewhere,
compilation was of absolute value. Justin, who often appeals to that
which he calls "The Memoirs of the Apostles,"[4] had under his notice
The Gospel quotations in the pseudo-Clementinian writings, of
weakened, in the second half of the second century, that the texts
bearing the names of the apostles took a decisive authority and
obtained the force of law.
framework of the received Gospels.]
Who does not see the value of documents thus composed of the tender
remembrances, and simple narratives, of the first two Christian
generations, still full of the strong impression which the illustrious
add, that the Gospels in question seem to proceed from that branch of
the Christian family which stood nearest to Jesus. The last work of
compilation, at least of the text which bears the name of Matthew,
appears to have been done in one of the countries situated at the
northeast of Palestine, such as Gaulonitis, Auranitis, Batanea, where
many Christians took refuge at the time of the Roman war, where were
found relatives of Jesus[1] even in the second century, and where the
So far we have only spoken of the three Gospels named the synoptics.
There remains a fourth, that which bears the name of John. Concerning
further from solution. Papias--who was connected with the school of
John, and who, if not one of his auditors, as Irenæus thinks,
the one called _Presbyteros Joannes_--says not a word of a _Life of
narratives of both Aristion and _Presbyteros Joannes_. If any such
everything therein that can contribute to the literary history of the
The intrinsic difficulties drawn from the perusal of the fourth Gospel
narration so precise, and so evidently that of an eye-witness, we find
discourses so totally different from those of Matthew? How is it that,
connected with a general plan of the life of Jesus, which appears much
more satisfactory and exact than that of the synoptics, these singular
passages occur in which we are sensible of a dogmatic interest
peculiar to the compiler, of ideas foreign to Jesus, and sometimes of
indications which place us on our guard against the good faith of the
we would fain regard as the interpolations of an ardent sectarian? Is
it indeed John, son of Zebedee, brother of James (of whom there is not
Greek these lessons of abstract metaphysics to which neither the
synoptics nor the Talmud offer any analogy? All this is of great
has been entirely written by the pen of a Galilean fisherman. But
that, as a whole, this Gospel may have originated toward the end of
the first century, from the great school of Asia Minor, which was
connected with John, that it represents to us a version of the life of
the Master, worthy of high esteem, and often to be preferred, is
by exterior evidences and by examination of the document itself.
Justin,[1] from Athenagorus,[2] from Tatian,[3] from Theophilus of
of the faith. Irenæus is explicit; now, Irenæus came from the school
of John, and between him and the apostle there was only Polycarp. The
of Valentinus,[6] in Montanism,[7] and in the quarrel of the
Quartodecimans,[8] is not less decisive. The school of John was the
regarding the origin of the Gospel as coincident with the rise of the
school, that the existence of the latter can be understood at all. Let
identity of style, the same peculiarities, the same favorite
But it is, above all, the perusal of the work itself which is
work is not really by the apostle, we must admit a fraud of which the
author convicts himself. Now, although the ideas of the time
no example in the apostolic world of a falsehood of this kind.
but we see clearly that he writes in the interest of this apostle. On
he has been the favorite of Jesus;[1] that in all the solemn
contrary, of Judas,[3] a hatred probably anterior to the betrayal,
in the history of Christ; that then he commenced to dictate a number
of things which he knew better than the rest, with the intention of
showing that in many instances, in which only Peter was spoken of, he
of Jesus, these trifling sentiments of jealousy had been manifested
between the sons of Zebedee and the other disciples. After the death
of James, his brother, John remained sole inheritor of the intimate
remembrances of which these two apostles, by the common consent, were
minute details which seem like the commentaries of an annotator--"it
"they had made a fire of coals, for it was cold;" "the coat was
without seam." Hence, lastly, the disorder of the compilation, the
irregularity of the narration, the disjointedness of the first
with tradition, we see in them the remembrances of an old man,
sometimes of remarkable freshness, sometimes having undergone strange
expressed themselves on the Gospel of Mark before Papias (Eusebius,
properly, a sort of excuse, indicating that John's disciples had
First Epistle of St. John, chap. i. 3, 5.]
A primary distinction, indeed, ought to be made in the Gospel of John.
On the one side, this Gospel presents us with a rough draft of the
life of Jesus, which differs considerably from that of the synoptics.
On the other, it puts into the mouth of Jesus discourses of which the
disinterested, impersonal tone of the synoptics, the Gospel of John
shows incessantly the preoccupation of the apologist--the mental
reservation of the sectarian, the desire to prove a thesis, and to
wrote the sayings of Jesus in their original tongue, the natural,
ineffable truth, the charm beyond comparison of the discourses in the
synoptics, their profoundly Hebraistic idiom, the analogies which they
present with the sayings of the Jewish doctors of the period, their
perfect harmony with the natural phenomena of Galilee--all these
distorted metaphysics, which fill the discourses of John, would speak
discourses of John some admirable gleams, some traits which truly come
from Jesus.[2] But the mystic tone of these discourses does not
correspond at all to the character of the eloquence of Jesus, such as
Gnosticism has already commenced; the Galilean era of the kingdom of
God is finished; the hope of the near advent of Christ is more
distant; we enter on the barrenness of metaphysics, into the darkness
of abstract dogma. The spirit of Jesus is not there, and, if the son
of Zebedee has truly traced these pages, he had certainly, in writing
them, quite forgotten the Lake of Gennesareth, and the charming
24, 25, produce, when we recall the absence of all comments which
intended to cover with the authority of Jesus certain doctrines dear
of Asia Minor at the time when they were written. Asia Minor was then
the theatre of a strange movement of syncretical philosophy; all the
germs of Gnosticism existed there already. John appears to have drunk
deeply from these strange springs. It may be that, after the crisis of
the year 68 (the date of the Apocalypse) and of the year 70 (the
destruction of Jerusalem), the old apostle, with an ardent and plastic
spirit, disabused of the belief in a near appearance of the Son of Man
him, of which several agreed sufficiently well with certain Christian
circumstances; the ideal of a person that we have known changes as we
change.[1] Considering Jesus as the incarnation of truth, John could
remembrances of his companions in exile, when these, after their
return, found themselves thrown in the midst of the political society
of the time.]
portions of the fourth Gospel have been added later; such is the
the death of John himself, (ver. 21-23.) Many other places bear the
trace of erasures and corrections.[2] It is impossible at this
the secrets of that mysterious school of Ephesus, which, more than
decisive test. Every one who sets himself to write the Life of Jesus
without any predetermined theory as to the relative value of the
Gospels, letting himself be guided solely by the sentiment of the
subject, will be led in numerous instances to prefer the narration of
John to that of the synoptics. The last months of the life of Jesus
especially are explained by John alone; a number of the features of
probability and possibility in the narrative of the fourth Gospel. On
the contrary, I dare defy any one to compose a Life of Jesus with any
of incessantly preaching and demonstrating himself, this perpetual
argumentation, this stage-effect devoid of simplicity, these long
tone of which is so often false and unequal,[4] would not be tolerated
by a man of taste compared with the delightful sentences of the
represent to us the sermons of Jesus, as the dialogues of Plato render
us the conversations of Socrates. They are, so to speak, the
variations of a musician improvising on a given theme. The theme is
of the artist has given itself full scope. We are sensible of the
factitious mode of procedure, of rhetoric, of gloss.[6] Let us add
that the vocabulary of Jesus cannot be recognized in the portions of
which we speak. The expression, "kingdom of God," which was so
hand, the style of the discourses attributed to Jesus by the fourth
Gospel, presents the most complete analogy with that of the Epistles
of St. John; we see that in writing the discourses, the author
movement of his own thought. Quite a new mystical language is
introduced, a language of which the synoptics had not the least idea
ever spoken in this style, which has nothing of Hebrew, nothing
it that but a single one of his hearers should have so well kept the
[Footnote 3: For example, that which concerns the announcement of the
long disputes of chapters vii., viii., and ix.]
[Footnote 5: We feel often that the author seeks pretexts for
[Footnote 7: Besides the synoptics, the Acts, the Epistles of St.
Literary history offers, besides, another example, which presents the
known to us by two of his disciples, Xenophon and Plato, the first
compilation; the second recalling the author of the fourth Gospel, by
teaching, should we follow the "dialogues" of Plato, or the
"discourses" of Xenophon? Doubt, in this respect, is not possible;
criticism, in writing the biography of the latter, to neglect the
moreover, is not complete, and the difference is in favor of the
fourth Gospel. The author of this Gospel is, in fact, the better
discourses, at least, are not from the son of Zebedee, we admit still,
Matthew," and "according to Mark." The historical sketch of the fourth
Gospel is the Life of Jesus, such as it was known in the school of
circumstances of the life of the Founder than the group whose
sojourns of Jesus at Jerusalem, data which the others did not possess.
The disciples of this school treated Mark as an indifferent
passages of Luke, where there is, as it were, an echo of the
traditions of John,[2] prove also that these traditions were not
entirely unknown to the rest of the Christian family.
[Footnote 2: For example, the pardon of the adulteress; the knowledge
which Luke has of the family of Bethany; his type of the character of
Martha responding to the [Greek: diêchouei] of John (chap. xii. 2);
the incident of the woman who wiped the feet of Jesus with her hair;
an obscure notion of the travels of Jesus to Jerusalem; the idea that
in his passion he was seen by three witnesses; the opinion of the
knowledge which he has of the part played by Annas in aiding Caiaphas;
the appearance of the angel in the agony (comp. John xii. 28, 29).]
These explanations will suffice, I think, to show, in the course of my
to this or that of the four guides whom we have for the _Life of
notes taken from a clear and lively remembrance of the teachings of
Jesus. A kind of splendor at once mild and terrible--a divine
who imposes upon himself the task of making a continuous narrative
touchstone. The real words of Jesus disclose themselves; as soon as we
touch them in this chaos of traditions of varied authenticity, we feel
them vibrate; they betray themselves spontaneously, and shine out of
defined legends which have proceeded from the zeal of the second
Christian generation.[1] The Gospel of Mark is much firmer, more
precise, containing fewer subsequent additions. He is the one of the
of Jesus in Syro-Chaldean.[2] He is full of minute observations,
who had preserved a lively image of him, as the apostle Peter himself.
As to the work of Luke, its historical value is sensibly weaker. It is
mature. The words of Jesus are there, more deliberate, more
outside of Palestine, and certainly after the siege of Jerusalem,[2]
two synoptics; he has an erroneous idea of the temple, which he
agree;[4] he softens the passages which had become embarrassing on
account of a more exalted idea of the divinity of Christ;[5] he
Hebraistic comments;[8] quotes no word of Jesus in this language, and
Luke had probably under his eyes the biographical collection of Mark,
and the _Logia_ of Matthew. But he treats them with much freedom;
according to his own idea; he has not the absolute impassibility of
Matthew and Mark. We might affirm certain things of his individual
that the triumph of the poor is approaching;[13] he likes especially
all the anecdotes showing prominently the conversion of sinners--the
exaltation of the humble;[14] he often modifies the ancient traditions
the legends about the infancy of Jesus, related with the long
which form the essential features of the Apocryphal Gospels. Finally,
he has in the narrative of the last hours of Jesus some circumstances
full of tender feeling, and certain words of Jesus of delightful
which we detect the presence of legend. Luke probably borrowed them
excite sentiments of piety.
[Footnote 1: Chap. xiv. 26. The rules of the apostolate (chap. x.)
have there a peculiar character of exaltation.]
[Footnote 10: Thus, of the repast at Bethany he gives two narratives,
[Footnote 13: The parable of the rich man and Lazarus. Compare chap.
thief, the parable of the Pharisee and the publican, and the prodigal
[Footnote 15: For example, Mary of Bethany is represented by him as a
meeting of the holy women, the penitent thief, &c. The speech to the
women of Jerusalem (xxiii. 28, 29) could scarcely have been conceived
except after the siege of the year 70.]
A great reserve was naturally enforced in presence of a document of
of Jesus, a "harmonizer," a corrector after the manner of Marcion and
Tatian. But he is a biographer of the first century, a divine artist,
who, independently of the information which he has drawn from more
ancient sources, shows us the character of the Founder with a
happiness of treatment, with a uniform inspiration, and a distinctness
which the other two synoptics do not possess. In the perusal of his
Gospel there is the greatest charm; for to the incomparable beauty of
the foundation, common to them all, he adds a degree of skill in
composition which singularly augments the effect of the portrait,
logia] of Matthew, [Greek: lechthenta ê prachthenta] of Mark), primary
compilations which no longer exist; second, the state of simple
effort at composition, without there appearing any personal bias of
the authors (the existing Gospels of Matthew and Mark); third, the
state of combination or of intentional and deliberate compiling, in
which we are sensible of an attempt to reconcile the different
versions (Gospel of Luke). The Gospel of John, as we have said, forms
a composition of another orders and is entirely distinct.
It will be remarked that I have made no use of the Apocryphal Gospels.
adding nothing thereto of any value. On the other hand, I have been
very attentive to collect the shreds preserved by the Fathers of the
Church, of the ancient Gospels which formerly existed parallel with
Gospels styled those of Justin, Marcion, and Tatian. The first two are
_Logia_ of Matthew, and appear to constitute one version of the Gospel
of this apostle, and because they were the Gospel of the
_Ebionim_--that is, of those small Christian sects of Batanea who
preserved the use of Syro-Chaldean, and who appear in some respects to
inferior, as critical authorities, to the compilation of Matthew's
It will now be seen, I think, what kind of historical value I
manner of Suetonius, nor fictitious legends in the style of
compare them with the Legends of the Saints, the Lives of Plotinus,
Proclus, Isidore, and other writings of the same kind, in which
historical truth and the desire to present models of virtue are
combined in various degrees. Inexactitude, which is one of the
features of all popular compositions, is there particularly felt. Let
us suppose that ten or twelve years ago three or four old soldiers of
the Empire had each undertaken to write the life of Napoleon from
errors, and great discordances. One of them would place Wagram before
the government of Robespierre from the Tuileries; a third would omit
expeditions of the highest importance. But one thing would certainly
result with a great degree of truthfulness from these simple recitals,
and that is the character of the hero, the impression which he made
than a formal and official history. We may say as much of the Gospels.
Solely attentive to bring out strongly the excellency of the Master,
indifference to everything that is not of the very spirit of Jesus.
as insignificant; for the higher the degree of inspiration attributed
to the words of Jesus, the less was granted to the compilers
invented in order to bring out more vividly certain traits of the
character of Jesus. This character itself constantly underwent
legends respecting Alexander were invented before the generation of
same manner in the twenty or thirty years which followed the death of
Jesus, and imposed upon his biography the peculiarities of an ideal
from all defect in the eyes of those who have loved him. With the wish
as Messianic had had their accomplishment. But this procedure, of
everything. No Jewish work of the time gives a series of prophecies
always false when analyzing those profound creations of popular
doubts. When we have two accounts of the same fact, it is extremely
sentiments of the actors? Let any one endeavor to get at the truth as
will not succeed. Two accounts of the same event given by different
coloring of the narratives, and limit ourselves to the bare facts
except certain short and almost mnemonic axioms, none of the
reports are scarcely so. I freely admit that the admirable account of
writing the history of Jesus to omit those sermons which give to us in
such a vivid manner the character of his discourses, and to limit
death by the order of Pilate at the instigation of the priests"? That
would be, in my opinion, a kind of inexactitude worse than that to
narratives in great part legendary, to take note of the observation I
have just made. To what would the life of Alexander be reduced if it
erroneous traditions contain a portion of truth which history cannot
of Mahomet, made much of the _hadith_ or oral traditions concerning
the prophet, and for often having attributed to his hero words which
year 50 and the year 140 of the Hegira. When the history of the Jewish
of Christianity shall be written, no one will make any scruple of
were written many hundreds of years after the time of the doctors in
of a simple reproduction of the documents which have come down to us,
fact is false because he possesses several versions of it, or because
carefully by induction. There is one class of narratives especially,
narratives of supernatural events. To seek to explain these, or to
reduce them to legends, is not to mutilate facts in the name of
theory; it is to make the observation of facts our groundwork. None of
believe them. No miracle ever occurred in the presence of men capable
of testing its miraculous character. Neither common people nor men of
habits of scientific research. In our days have we not seen almost all
respectable people dupes of the grossest frauds or of puerile
illusions? Marvellous facts, attested by the whole population of small
probable that the miracles of the past, which have all been performed
in popular gatherings, would equally present their share of illusion,
It is not, then, in the name of this or that philosophy, but in the
name of universal experience, that we banish miracle from history. We
A commission, composed of physiologists, physicists, chemists, persons
arrange the whole system of precautions, so as to leave no chance of
over again what has been done once; and as, in the order of miracle,
there can be no question of ease or difficulty, the thaumaturgus would
happen in the world; second, that the power of producing them belongs,
hitherto the thaumaturgus has chosen the subject of the experiment,
themselves--most commonly in consequence of the invincible want to see
legends afterward? Until a new order of things prevails, we shall
maintain then this principle of historical criticism--that a
implies credulity or imposture, that the duty of the historian is to
explain it, and seek to ascertain what share of truth or of error it
Such are the rules which have been followed in the composition of
this work. To the perusal of documentary evidences I have been able to
add an important source of information--the sight of the places where
exploration of ancient Phoenicia, which I directed in 1860 and
1861,[1] led me to reside on the frontiers of Galilee and to travel
there frequently. I have traversed, in all directions, the country of
any important locality of the history of Jesus has escaped me. All
this history, which at a distance seems to float in the clouds of an
striking agreement of the texts with the places, the marvellous
harmony of the Gospel ideal with the country which served it as a
recitals of Matthew and Mark, in place of an abstract being, whose
[Footnote 1: The work which will contain the results of this mission
thus taken. When I first conceived the idea of a history of the origin
of Christianity, what I wished to write was, in fact, a history of
simple game of abstractions; that men are more than doctrines. It was
doctrines of the Resurrection and of the Word might have developed
fruitful fact, called Christianity. This fact is the work of Jesus, of
St. Paul, of St. John. To write the history of Jesus, of St. Paul, of
St. John is to write the history of the origin of Christianity. The
In such an effort to make the great souls of the past live again, some
share of divination and conjecture must be permitted. A great life is
of small facts. It requires a profound sentiment to embrace them all,
moulding them into perfect unity. The method of art in a similar
subject is a good guide; the exquisite tact of a Goethe would know how
to apply it. The essential condition of the creations of art is, that
they shall form a living system of which all the parts are mutually
throughout. The secret laws of life, of the progression of organic
products, of the melting of minute distinctions, ought to be consulted
soul of history; what must be sought is not the petty certainty about
trifles, it is the correctness of the general sentiment, the
truthfulness of the coloring. Each trait which departs from the rules
of classic narration ought to warn us to be careful; for the fact
restoring the Minerva of Phidias according to the texts, we produced a
are happily blended. Should we then be sure of having a perfect
reproduction of the Greek statue? No; but at least we should not have
the caricature of it; we should have the general spirit of the
work--one of the forms in which it could have existed.
This idea of a living organism we have not hesitated to take as our
guide in the general arrangement of the narrative. The perusal of the
very true plan of the _Life of Jesus_ in their minds, have not been
tradition supplies it, would only be to write the history of Jesus as
the history of a celebrated man would be written, by giving pell-mell
the letters and anecdotes of his youth, his old age, and of his
fragments of the different epochs in the life of Mahomet, has yielded
case of the Gospels, the public life of Jesus having been shorter and
less eventful than the life of the founder of Islamism. Meanwhile, the
be taxed with gratuitous subtlety. There is no great abuse of
hypothesis in supposing that a founder of a new religion commences by
in full possession of his idea, he delights in a kind of calm and
the distribution of the discourses, a gradation perfectly analogous to
that which we have just indicated. The reserved turns of expression of
which we make use in unfolding the progress of the ideas of Jesus will
methodical exposition of a profound, complicated thought.
If the love of a subject can help one to understand it, it will also,
To write the history of a religion, it is necessary, firstly, to have
To abstain from attaching one's self to any of the forms which
captivate the adoration of men, is not to deprive ourselves of the
enjoyment of that which is good and beautiful in them. No transitory
will reveal Himself after him. Profoundly unequal, and so much the
manifestations of God hidden in the depths of the human conscience are
all of the same order. Jesus cannot belong solely to those who call
themselves his disciples. He is the common honor of all who share a
common humanity. His glory does not consist in being relegated out of
The great event of the History of the world is the revolution by which
the noblest portions of humanity have passed from the ancient
religions, comprised under the vague name of Paganism, to a religion
founded on the Divine Unity, the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the
Son of God. It has taken nearly a thousand years to accomplish this
years in its formation. But the origin of the revolution in question
of Augustus and Tiberius. At that time there lived a superior
able to inspire, became the object and fixed the starting-point of the
future faith of humanity.
during some thousands of years, became corrupted in the strangest
under the gross form in which we still find it in certain parts of
shameful scenes of butchery which form the character of the ancient
religion of Mexico. Amongst others, especially in Africa, it became
pure Fetichism, that is, the adoration of a material object, to which
were attributed supernatural powers. Like the instinct of love, which
becomes perverted and ferocious, so this divine faculty of religion
extirpated from the human race, a cause of errors and crimes which the
progress to be made in religion. China arrived very early at a sort of
knew the advantages nor the abuses of the religious spirit. At all
current of humanity. The religions of Babylonia and Syria were never
freed from a substratum of strange sensuality; these religions
remained, until their extinction in the fourth and fifth centuries of
our era, schools of immorality, in which at intervals glimpses of the
divine world were obtained by a sort of poetic intuition. Egypt,
notwithstanding an apparent kind of Fetichism, had very early
metaphysical dogmas and a lofty symbolism. But doubtless these
interpretations of a refined theology were not primitive. Man has
never, in the possession of a clear idea, amused himself by clothing
it in symbols: it is oftener after long reflections, and from the
impossibility felt by the human mind of resigning itself to the
meaning is lost. Moreover, it is not from Egypt that the faith of
humanity has come. The elements which, in the religion of a Christian,
are exterior forms of little consequence, or dross of which the most
purified worships always retain some portion. The grand defect of the
religions of which we speak was their essentially superstitious
character. They only threw into the world millions of amulets and
exercise of individual liberty.
The poetry of the soul--faith, liberty, virtue, devotion--made their
first religious intuitions of the Indo-European race were essentially
naturalistic. But it was a profound and moral naturalism, a loving
embrace of Nature by man, a delicious poetry, full of the sentiment of
the Infinite--the principle, in fine, of all that which the Germanic
and Celtic genius, of that which a Shakespeare and a Goethe should
philosophy--it was a state of melancholy, it was tenderness, it was
condition of morals and religion. The faith of humanity, however,
could not come from thence, because these ancient forms of worships
to the present day by virtue of the astonishing faculty of
herself, on the contrary, was converted when she saw the flag of the
It is the Semitic race[1] which has the glory of having made the
religion of humanity. Far beyond the confines of history, resting
under his tent, free from the taint of a corrupted world, the Bedouin
patriarch prepared the faith of mankind. A strong antipathy against
the voluptuous worships of Syria, a grand simplicity of ritual, the
complete absence of temples, and the idol reduced to insignificant
_theraphim_, constituted his superiority. Among all the tribes of the
nomadic Semites, that of the Beni-Israel was already chosen for
tables of stone, and which they attributed to their great liberator
Moses, had become the code of Monotheism, and contained, as compared
with the institutions of Egypt and Chaldea, powerful germs of social
side to admit of bearing poles, constituted all their religious
_matériel_; there were collected the sacred objects of the nation, its
relics, its souvenirs, and, lastly, the "book,"[2] the journal of the
archives, being near the book and having the control of it, very soon
from the other priests of antiquity. The character which essentially
priests, each wandering tribe had its _nabi_ or prophet, a sort of
living oracle who was consulted for the solution of obscure questions
supposed to require a high degree of clairvoyance. The _nabis_ of
of the ancient democratic spirit, enemies of the rich, opposed to all
paths of other nations, they were the true authors of the religious
preeminence of the Jewish people. Very early they announced unlimited
hopes, and when the people, in part the victims of their impolitic
would be the capital of the whole world, and the human race become
the summit of a mountain, toward which all people should turn, as an
oracle whence the universal law should proceed, as the centre of an
find again the joys of Eden.[3]
people who speak or have spoken one of the languages called Semitic.
Such a designation is entirely defective; but it is one of those
that the second part of the book of Isaiah, beginning at chap. xl., is
the martyrdom and celebrate the power of the "Man of Sorrows."
Respecting one of those sublime sufferers, who, like Jeremiah, stained
the streets of Jerusalem with their blood, one of the inspired wrote a
song upon the sufferings and triumph of the "servant of God," in which
all the prophetic force of the genius of Israel seemed
and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness. He
is despised and rejected of men; and we hid, as it were, our faces
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of
and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was
wicked. When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall
see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
texts, pretending to represent the true law of Moses, such as
different spirit from that of the old nomads. A marked fanaticism was
the dominant feature of this spirit. Furious believers unceasingly
instigated violence against all who wandered from the worship of
Jehovah--they succeeded in establishing a code of blood, making death
singular contradictions of vehemence and mildness. This zeal, unknown
to the coarser simplicity of the time of the Judges, inspired tones of
itself felt; Utopias, dreams of a perfect society, took a place in the
code. The Pentateuch, a mixture of patriarchal morality and ardent
filled the souls of Hezekiah, of Josiah, and of Jeremiah, was thus
absolute rule of the national mind.
This great book once created, the history of the Jewish people
followed each other in Western Asia, in destroying its hope of a
cherished with a kind of sombre passion. Caring little for the
than that of its religious enthusiasts, no other enemies than those of
was the work of men penetrated with a high ideal of the present life,
and believing that they had found the best means of realizing it. The
conviction of all was, that the _Thora_, well observed, could not fail
anything but abstract right, entered little into questions of private
proceed from it will be of a social, and not a political order, that
the work at which this people labors is a kingdom of God, not a civil
vocation. A series of pious men, Ezra, Nehemiah, Onias, the Maccabees,
consumed with zeal for the Law, succeeded each other in the defense of
poets had wept a vanished golden age. Israel placed the age of gold in
the future. The perennial poesy of religious souls, the Psalms,
harmony. Israel became truly and specially the people of God, while
and Babylonia, to an official charlatanism, in Egypt and Syria to a
which the Christian martyrs did in the first centuries of our era,
that which the victims of persecuting orthodoxy have done, even in the
bosom of Christianity, up to our time, the Jews did during the two
movement of ideas, ending in the most opposite results, made of them,
Their dispersion along all the coast of the Mediterranean, and the use
of the Greek language, which they adopted when out of Palestine,
prepared the way for a propagandism, of which ancient societies,
divided into small nationalities, had never offered a single example.
Up to the time of the Maccabees, Judaism, in spite of its persistence
in announcing that it would one day be the religion of the human race,
had had the characteristic of all the other worships of antiquity, it
was a worship of the family and the tribe. The Israelite thought,
indeed, that his worship was the best, and spoke with contempt of
strange gods; but he believed also that the religion of the true God
family did he embrace the worship of Jehovah.[1] No Israelite cared to
convert the stranger to a worship which was the patrimony of the sons
of Abraham. The development of the pietistic spirit, after Ezra and
the right of entering it was given;[2] soon it became a work of piety
above the petty ideas of race, did not yet exist; for, by a strange
with disdain.[4] But the idea of a sovereign religion, the idea that
laws--the idea which makes apostles and martyrs--was founded. Profound
was henceforth the feeling of every Jew.[5] By a cycle of legends
destined to furnish models of immovable firmness, such as the
histories of Daniel and his companions, the mother of the Maccabees
and her seven sons,[6] the romance of the race-course of
Alexandria[7]--the guides of the people sought above all to inculcate
[Footnote 4: Mishnah, _Shebiit_, X. 9; Talmud of Babylon, _Niddah_,
[Footnote 5: Apocryphal letter of Baruch, in Fabricius, _Cod. pseud.,
[Footnote 6: II. Book of Maccabees, ch. vii. and the _De Maccabæis_,
[Footnote 7: III. Book (Apocr.) of Maccabees; Rufin, Suppl. ad Jos.,
The persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes made this idea a passion,
despair threw the believers into the world of visions and dreams. The
first apocalypse, "The Book of Daniel," appeared. It was like a
revival of prophecy, but under a very different form from the ancient
one, and with a much larger idea of the destinies of the world. The
Book of Daniel gave, in a manner, the last expression to the Messianic
hopes. The Messiah was no longer a king, after the manner of David and
Solomon, a theocratic and Mosaic Cyrus; he was a "Son of man"
Perhaps the _Sosiosh_ of Persia, the great prophet who was to come,
charged with preparing the reign of Ormuzd, gave some features to this
new ideal.[2] The unknown author of the Book of Daniel had, in any
technical terms of the new belief in the Messiah; and we might apply
to him what Jesus said of John the Baptist: Before him, the prophets;
after him, the kingdom of God.
Gesellschaft_," chap. i. 263; _Boundehesch_, chap. xxxi. The want of
It must not, however, be supposed that this profoundly religious and
as was the case in all the conflicts which have disturbed the bosom of
Christianity. The Jew of this epoch was as little theological as
possible. He did not speculate upon the essence of the Divinity; the
beliefs about angels, about the destinies of man, about the Divine
personality, of which the first germs might already be perceived, were
himself according to the turn of his mind, but of which a great number
of men had never heard. They were the most orthodox even, who did not
simplicity of the Mosaic law. No dogmatic power analogous to that
was only at the beginning of the third century, when Christianity had
fallen into the hands of reasoning races, mad with dialectics and
history of the Church but the history of one immense controversy.
but in these contests, of which the Talmud has preserved the principal
details, there is not a single word of speculative theology. To
no theoretical symbol. One of the disciples of the boldest Arabian
philosophy, Moses Maimonides, was able to become the oracle of the
The reigns of the last Asmoneans, and that of Herod, saw the
series of religious movements. In the degree that power became
secularized, and passed into the hands of unbelievers, the Jewish
of that which passed in this forgotten corner of the East. The minds
abreast of their age were, however, better informed. The tender and
second Isaiah. The birth of a child throws him into dreams of a
universal palingenesis.[1] These dreams were of every-day occurrence,
and shaped into a kind of literature which was designated Sibylline.
The quite recent formation of the empire exalted the imagination; the
great era of peace on which it entered, and that impression of
of revolution, gave birth on all sides to unlimited hopes.
[Footnote 1: Egl. iv. The _Cumæum carmen_ (v. 4) was a sort of
Sibylline apocalypse, borrowed from the philosophy of history familiar
arms; Anna, daughter of Phanuel, regarded as a prophetess[1]--passed
fulfillment of the hopes of Israel. They felt a powerful presentiment;
they were sensible of the approach of something unknown.
This confused mixture of clear views and dreams, this alternation of
man, to whom the universal conscience has decreed the title of Son of
